.c -*-Mode:Bolio-*-

.chapter The Chaosnet
.setq chaos-chapter chapter-number
.setq chaosnet section-page

The purpose of the basic software protocol of Chaosnet is to allow
high-speed communication among processes on different machines, with no
undetected transmission errors.

.section Chaosnet Overview

The principal service provided by Chaosnet is a 2connection* between
two user processes.  This is a full-duplex reliable packet-transmission
channel.  The network undertakes never to garble, lose, duplicate, or
resequence the packets; in the event of a serious error it may break the
connection off entirely, informing both user processes.  User programs
may deal explicitly in terms of packets.  They may also ignore packet
boundaries and treat the connection as two uni-directional streams of
8-bit or 16-bit bytes, but this really works by means of packets.

If you just want to ask a question of another process or host and
receive a reply, you can use a 2simple transaction*: You send only
one packet to the other host, and it sends one packet back.  This is
more efficient than establishing a connection and using it only briefly.
In a simple transaction, the server cannot tell whether the user
received the answer; and if the user does not receive the answer, it
cannot tell whether the server received the question.  In fact, the
server might receive the question more than once.  If this is
unacceptable, a connection must be used.

Each node (or host) on the network is identified by an 2address*,
which is a 16-bit number.  These addresses are used in the routing of
packets.  There is a table (the system host table, 3SYS: CHAOS; HOSTS
TXT*) that relates symbolic host names to numeric host addresses.  The
host table can record addresses on any number of different networks, and
in certain contexts a host address is meaningful only together with the
name of the network it is for.

The data transmitted over connections are in units called 2packets*.
Each packet contains an 8-bit number, the 2opcode*, which indicates
what its function is.  Opcode numbers are always given in octal.
Opcodes less than 200 (octal) are special purpose.  Each such opcode
that is used has an assigned name and a specific function.  Users need
not know about all of them.  Opcodes 200 through 277 (octal) are used
for 8-bit user data.  Opcodes 300 through 377 (octal) are used for
16-bit user data.

Each packet also contains some number of data bytes, whose meaning
depends on the opcode.  If the opcode is for user data, then it is up to
the application user software to decide on the interpretation.

.need 1500
.nopara
Establishing a connection:

A connection is created because one process sends a request to a host.
The request is a packet containing the special-purpose opcode RFC.  The
data contains a 2contact name* which is used to find the process to
connect to.  There may be a process on the target host 2listening* on
this contact name.  If so, it decides whether to agree to the
connection.  Alternatively, the contact name can be the name of a standard service
such as 7TELNET*.  In this case, the receiving host creates a
process to respond, loaded with the program for that service.

Once a connection has been established, there is no more need for the
contact name and it is discarded.  The Lisp Machine remembers what
contact name was used to open a connection, but this is only for the
user's information.

In the case where two existing processes that already know about each
other want to establish a connection, they must agree on a contact name,
and then one of them must send the request while the other listens.
They must agree between themselves which is to do which.

Contact names are restricted to strings of upper-case letters, numbers,
and ASCII punctuation.  The maximum length of a contact name is limited
only by the packet size, although on ITS hosts the names of
automatically-started servers are limited by the file-system to six characters.
The contact name is terminated by a space.  If the RFC packet contains
data beyond the contact name, it is just for interpretation by the
listening process, which can also use it in deciding whether to accept
the connection.

A simple transaction is also begun with an RFC packet.  There is
nothing in the RFC packet which indicates whether it is intended to
start a connection or a simple transaction.  The server has the option
of doing either one.  But normally any given server always does one or
the other, and the requestor knows which one to expect.

The server accepts the request for a connection by sending an OPN packet
(a packet with opcode OPN) to the requestor.  It can also refuse the
connection by sending a CLS packet.  The data in the CLS packet is a
string explaining the reason for the refusal.  Another alternative is to
tell the requestor to try a different host or a different contact name.
This is called 2forwarding* the request, and is done with a FWD
packet.

The server can also respond with an answer, an ANS packet, which is the
second half of a simple transaction.  (Refusing and forwarding are also
meaningful when a simple transaction is intended, just as when a
connection is intended).

.need 1500
.nopara
Once the connection is open:

Data transmitted through Chaosnet generally follow Lisp Machine
standards.  Bits and bytes are numbered from right to
left, or least-significant to most-significant.  The first 8-bit byte
in a 16-bit word is the one in the arithmetically least-significant
position.  The first 16-bit word in a 32-bit double-word is the one
in the arithmetically least-significant position.  This is the
``little-endian'' convention.

Big-endian machines such as the PDP-10 need to reorder the characters
in a word in order to access them conveniently.  For their sake, some
packet opcodes imply 8-bit data and some imply 16-bit data.  Packets
known to contain 8-bit bytes, including opcodes 200 through 277, are
stored in the big-endian machine's memory a character at a time,
whereas packets containing 16-bit data are stored 16 bits at a time.

The character set used is dictated by the higher-level protocol in use.
Telnet and Supdup, for example, each specifies its own ASCII-based character set.
The default character set--used for new protocols and for text that
appears in the basic Chaosnet protocol, such as contact names--is
the Lisp Machine character set.

If one process tries to send data faster than the other can process it,
the buffered packets could devour lots of memory.  Preventing this is
the purpose of 2flow control*.  Each process specifies a 2window
size*, which is the number of packets that are allowed to be waiting
for that process to read.  Attempting to send on a connection whose
other side's window is full waits until the other side reads some
packets.  The default window size is 13, but for some applications you
might wish to specify a larger value (see 3chaos:connect*,
(chaos:connect-fun)).  There is little reason ever to
specify a smaller value.

.need 1500
.nopara
Breaking a connection:

Either end of a connection can break the connection abruptly by sending
a CLS packet.  The data in this packet is a string describing why the
connection was broken.

To break a connection gently, it is necessary to verify that all the
data transmitted was received properly before sending a CLS.  This
matters in some applications and is unnecessary in others.  When it is
needed, it is done by sending a special packet, an EOF packet, which is
mostly like a data packet except for its significance with regard to
closing the connection.  The EOF packet is like the words ``the end'' at
the end of a book: it tells the recipient that it has received all the
data it is supposed to receive, that there are no missing pages that
should have followed.  When the sender of the EOF sees the
acknowledgement for the EOF packet, indicating that the EOF was received
and understood, it can break the connection with a CLS.

If a process that expects to receive an EOF gets a CLS with no EOF, it
takes this to mean that the connection was broken before the
transmission was finished.  If the process does receive an EOF, it does
not break the connection itself immediately.  It waits to see the sender
of the EOF break it.  If this does not happen in a few seconds, the EOF
recipient can break the connection.

It is illegal to put data in an EOF packet; in other words, the byte
count should always be zero.  Most Chaosnet implementations simply
ignore any data that is present in an EOF.

.setq safe-eof-protocol page

If both sides are sending data and both need to know for certain where
``the end'' is, they must do something a little more complicated.
Arbitrarily call one party the user and the other the server.  The
protocol is that after sending all its data, each party sends an EOF and
waits for it to be acknowledged.  The server, having seen its EOF
acknowledged, sends a second EOF.  The user, having seen its EOF
acknowledged, looks for a second EOF and 2then* sends a CLS and goes
away.  The server goes away when it sees the user's CLS, or after a
brief timeout has elapsed.  This asymmetrical protocol guarantees that
each side gets a chance to know that both sides agree that all the data
have been transferred.  The first CLS is sent only after both sides
have waited for their (first) EOF to be acknowledged.

.need 1500
.nopara
Clearing up inconsistencies:

If a host crashes, it is supposed to forget all the connections that it
had.  When a packet arrives on one of the former connections, the host
will report ``no such connection'' to the sender with a LOS packet, whose
data is a string explaining what happened.  The same thing happens if a
CLS packet is lost; the intended recipient may keep trying to use the
connection that the other side (which sent the CLS) no longer believes
should exist.  LOS packets are used
whenever a host receives a packet that it should not be getting; the
recipient of the LOS packet knows that the connection it thought it was
using does not exist any more.

.section Conns

On the Lisp Machine, your handle on a connection is a named
structure of type 3chaos:conn*.  The 3conn* may have an actual
connection attached to it, or it may have a connection still being made,
or record that a connection was refused, closed or broken.

.table 3
.xitem chaos:inactive-state "connection state"
This 3conn* is not really in use at all.

.xitem chaos:rfc-sent-state "connection state"
This 3conn* was used to request a connection to another process,
but no reply has been received.  When the reply is received, it may
change the 3conn*'s state to 3chaos:answered-state*,
3chaos:cls-received-state*, or 3chaos:open-state*.

.xitem chaos:listening-state "connection state"
This 3conn* is being used to listen with.
If a RFC packet is received for the contact name you are listening
on, the state changes to 3chaos:rfc-received-state*.

.xitem chaos:rfc-received-state "connection state"
This means that your listen has ``heard'' an RFC packet that matches
it.  You can accept, reject, forward or answer the request.  Accepting
goes to state 3chaos:open-state*; refusing or forwarding goes to to state
3chaos:inactive-state*.

.xitem chaos:open-state "connection state"
This 3conn* is one end of an open connection.
You can receive any data packets that are waiting and you can transmit
data.

.xitem chaos:answered-state "connection state"
This 3conn* was used to send an RFC packet and an ANS packet
was received in response (a simple transaction answer arrived).	 You can
read the ANS packet, that is all.

.xitem chaos:cls-received-state "connection state"
This 3conn* has received a CLS packet (the connection was closed
or refused).  You can read any data packets that came in before the
CLS; after them you can read the CLS.

.xitem chaos:los-received-state "connection state"
This 3conn*'s connection was broken and the other end sent a LOS
packet to say so.  The LOS packet is the only packet available to be
read.

.xitem chaos:host-down-state "connection state"
The host at the other end of this 3conn*'s connection has not
responded to anything for a significant time.

.xitem chaos:foreign-state "connection state"
The connection is being used with a foreign protocol encapsulated in UNC
packets
(see the MIT AI Lab memo entitled ``Chaosnet'' for more information on this).
.end_table

.nopara
These are
the fields of a 3conn* that you might be interested in:

.defun chaos:conn-state conn
This slot holds the state of 2conn*.  It is one of the symbols listed above.
.end_defun

.defun chaos:conn-foreign-address conn
Returns the address of the host at the other end of this connection.
Use 3si:get-host-from-address* to find out which host this is
(see (si:get-host-from-address-fun)).
.end_defun

.defun chaos:conn-read-pkts conn
Internally threaded chain of incoming packets available to be read from
2conn*.

Its main use for the applications programmer is to test whether there
are any incoming packets.
.end_defun

.defun chaos:conn-window-available conn
Returns the number of packets you may transmit before the network
software forces you to wait for the receiver to read some.
This is just a minimum.  By the time you actually send this many
packets, the receiver may already have said he has room for some more.
.end_defun

.defun chaos:conn-plist conn
This slot is used to store arbitrary properties on 2conn*.
You can store properties yourself; use property names that are not in
the 3chaos* package to avoid conflict.
.end_defun

.defun chaos:contact-name conn
Returns the contact name with which 2conn* was created.  The contact
name is not significant to the functioning of the connection once an RFC
and LSN have matched, but it is remembered for the sake of debugging.
The user can use this function or the 3:contact-name* message to a
stream to determine any contact name ``arguments.''
.end_defun

.defun chaos:wait conn state timeout &optional whostate
Waits until the state of 2conn* is not the symbol 2state*, or until
2timeout* 60ths of a second have elapsed.  If the timeout occurs, 3nil* is
returned; otherwise 3t* is returned.  2whostate* is the process state to
put in the who-line; it defaults to 3"Chaosnet wait"*.
.end_defun

.section Opening and Closing Connections

.subsection User-Side

.defun chaos:connect host contact-name &optional window-size timeout
Opens a stream connection; returns a 3conn* if it succeeds or else a
string giving the reason for failure.  2host* may be a number or the name
of a known host.  2contact-name* is a string containing the contact name
and any additional arguments to go in the RFC packet.  If 2window-size*
is not specified it defaults to 13.  If 2timeout* is not specified it
defaults to 600 (ten seconds).
.end_defun

.defun chaos:simple host contact-name &optional timeout
Taking arguments similar to those of 3chaos:connect*, this performs the user
side of a simple-transaction.  The returned value is either an ANS packet
or a string containing a failure message.  The ANS packet should be disposed
of (using 3chaos:return-pkt*, see below) when you are done with it.
.end_defun

.setq remove-conn page
.defun chaos:remove-conn conn
Makes 2conn* null and void.  It becomes inactive, all its buffered packets
are freed, and the corresponding Chaosnet connection (if any) goes away.
This is called 2removing* the connection.  2conn* itself is marked
for reuse for another Chaosnet connection, so you should not do anything
else with it after it is removed.
.end_defun

.defun chaos:close-conn conn &optional reason
Closes and removes the connection.  If it is open, a CLS packet is sent
containing the string 2reason*.  Don't use this to reject RFC's; use
3chaos:reject* for that.
.end_defun

.defun chaos:open-foreign-connection host index &optional pkt-allocation distinguished-port
Creates a 3conn* that may be used to transmit and receive foreign
protocols encapsulated in UNC packets.  2host* and 2index* are the
destination address for packets sent with 3chaos:send-unc-pkt*.
2pkt-allocation* is the `window size', i.e. the maximum number of input
packets that may be buffered.  It defaults to 10.
If 2distinguished-port* is supplied, the local index is set to it.
This is necessary for protocols that define the meanings of particular index
numbers.

See the MIT AI Lab memo entitled ``Chaosnet'' for more information on
using foreign protocols.
.end_defun

.subsection Server-Side

.defun chaos:listen contact-name &optional window-size wait-for-rfc
Waits for an RFC for the specified contact name to arrive, then returns a
3conn* that is in 3chaos:rfc-received-state*.  If 2window-size* is
not specified it defaults to 13.  If 2wait-for-rfc* is specified as 3nil*
(it defaults to 3t*) then the 3conn* is returned immediately without
waiting for an RFC to arrive.
.end_defun

.defvar chaos:server-alist
Contains an entry for each server that always exists.  When an RFC
arrives for one of these servers, the specified form is evaluated in the
background process; typically it creates a process that will then do a
3chaos:listen*.  Use the 3add-initialization* function to add entries
to this list.  Here is how the EVAL server is installed:
.lisp
(ADD-INITIALIZATION "EVAL"
     '(PROCESS-RUN-FUNCTION "EVAL Server" 'EVAL-SERVER-FUNCTION)
     NIL
     'CHAOS:SERVER-ALIST)
.end_lisp
.end_defvar

.defun chaos:accept conn
2conn* must be in 3chaos:rfc-received-state*.  An OPN packet is
transmitted and 2conn* enters the 3chaos:open-state*.  If the RFC packet
has not already been read with 3chaos:get-next-pkt*, it is discarded.  You
should read it before accepting, if it contains arguments in addition to the
contact name.
.end_defun

.defun chaos:reject conn reason
2conn* must be in 3chaos:rfc-received-state*.  A CLS packet containing
the string 2reason* is sent and 2conn* is removed from the connection table.
.end_defun

.defun chaos:forward-all contact-name host
Causes all future requests for connection to this host on 2contact-name* 
to be forwarded to the same contact name at host 2host*.
.end_defun

.defun chaos:answer-string conn string
2conn* must be in 3chaos:rfc-received-state*.  An ANS packet containing
the string 2string* is sent and 2conn* is removed from the connection table.
.end_defun

.defun chaos:answer conn pkt
2conn* must be in 3chaos:rfc-received-state*.  2pkt* is transmitted as
an ANS packet and 2conn* is removed.  Use this function when the answer 
is some binary data rather than a text string.
.end_defun

.defun chaos:fast-answer-string contact-name string
If a pending RFC exists to 2contact-name*, an ANS containing 2string*
is sent in response to it and 3t* is returned.  Otherwise 3nil* is returned.
This function involves the minimum possible overhead.  No 3conn* is created.
.end_defun

.c .defun chaos:forward conn pkt host
.c Not documented because it is useless and takes the wrong arguments.

.section Stream Input and Output

.defun chaos:open-stream host contact-name &key window-size timeout error direction characters ascii-translation
Opens a Chaosnet connection and returns a stream that does I/O to it.
2host* is the host to connect to; 2contact-name* is the contact name at that host.
These two arguments are passed along to 3chaos:connect*.

If 2host* is 3nil*, a connection to 2contact-name* is listened
for, and a stream is returned as soon as a request comes in for that
contact name.  At this time, you must accept or reject the connection by
invoking the stream operation 3:accept* or 3:reject*.  Before you
decide which to do, you can use the 3:foreign-host* operation to find
out where the connection came from.

The remaining arguments are:
.table 2
.item window-size
.item1 timeout
These two arguments specify two arguments for 3chaos:connect*.
.item error
If the value is non-3nil*, a failure to connect causes a Lisp error.
Otherwise, it causes a string describing the error to be returned.
.item direction
.item1 characters
.item1 ascii-translation
These three arguments are passed along to 3chaos:make-stream*.
.end_table
.end_defun

.defun chaos:make-stream conn &key direction characters ascii-translation
Creates and returns a stream that does I/O on the connection 2conn*,
which should be open as a stream connection.  2direction* may be
3:input*, 3:output* or 3:bidirectional*.

If 2characters* is non-nil (which is the default), the stream reads
and writes 8-bit bytes.  If 2characters* is 3nil*, the stream reads
and writes 16-bit bytes.

If 2ascii-translation* is non-3nil*, characters written to the
stream are translated to standard ASCII before they are sent, and
characters read are translated from ASCII to the Lisp Machine character
set.
.end_defun

.defmethod chaos:basic-stream :connection
Returns the connection with which this stream is connected.
.end_defmethod

.defmethod chaos:basic-stream :contact-name
Return the contact name with with this stream was opened.
.end_defmethod

.defmethod chaos:basic-stream :foreign-host
Returns the host object for the host at the other end of this stream's connection.
.end_defmethod

.defmethod chaos:basic-stream :accept
Accepts the request for a connection which this stream received.
Used only for streams made by 3chaos:open-stream* with 3nil* as
the 2host* argument.
.end_defmethod

.defmethod chaos:basic-stream :reject reason-string
Rejects the request for a connection which this stream received, sending
2reason-string* in the CLS packet as the reason.  Used only for
streams made by 3chaos:open-stream* with 3nil* as the 2host*
argument.
.end_defmethod

.defmethod chaos:basic-stream :close &optional abort-p
Sends a CLS packet and removes the connection.  For output connections and bidirectional
connections, the 3:eof* operation is performed first, if
2abort-p* is 3nil*.
.end_defmethod

.defmethod chaos:basic-output-stream :force-output
Any buffered output is transmitted.  Normally output is accumulated until a
full packet's worth of bytes are available, so that maximum-size packets are
transmitted.
.end_defmethod

.defmethod chaos:basic-output-stream :finish
Waits until either all packets have been sent and acknowledged, or the connection ceases
to be open.  If successful, returns 3t*; if the connection goes into a bad state,
returns 3nil*.
.end_defmethod

.defmethod chaos:basic-output-stream :eof
Forces out any buffered output, sends an EOF packet, and does a 3:finish*.
.end_defmethod

.defmethod chaos:basic-input-stream :clear-eof
Allows you to read past an EOF packet on input.  Normally, each 3:tyi*
done at eof returns 3nil* or signals the specified eof error.  If you
do 3:clear-eof* on the stream, you can then read more data (assuming
there are data packets following the EOF packet).
.end_defmethod

.section Packet Input and Output

Input and output on a Chaosnet connection can be done at the whole-packet
level, using the functions in this section.  A packet is represented by
a 3chaos:pkt* data structure.  Allocation of 3pkts* is controlled by the system;
each 3pkt* that it gives you must be given back.  There are functions to
convert between 3pkts* and strings.  A 3pkt* is an 3art-16b* array
containing the packet header and data; the leader of a 3pkt*
contains a number of fields used by the system.

.defconst chaos:first-data-word-in-pkt
This is the index in any 3pkt* of the element that is the first
16-bit word of user data.  (Preceding elements are used to store a
header used by the hardware.)
.end_defconst

.defconst chaos:max-data-words-per-pkt
The maximum number of 16-bit data words allowed in a packet.
.end_defconst

.defun chaos:pkt-opcode pkt
Accessor for the opcode of the packet 2pkt*.  To set the opcode, do
.lisp
(setf (chaos:pkt-opcode my-pkt) my-opcode)
.end_lisp
The system provides names for all the opcodes standardly used.  The names useful to the applications programmer appear at the end of this section.
.end_defun

.defun chaos:pkt-nbytes pkt
Accessor for the number-of-data-bytes field of 2pkt*'s.
This field says how much of 2pkt*'s contects are valid data,
measured in 8-bit bytes.
This field can be set with 3setf* also.
.end_defun

.defun chaos:pkt-string pkt
An indirect array that is the data field of 2pkt* as a string of 8-bit bytes.
The length of this string is equal to 3(chaos:pkt-nbytes 2pkt*)*.
If you wish to record the contects of 2pkt* permanently, you must copy this string.
.end_defun

.defun chaos:set-pkt-string pkt &rest strings
Copies the 2strings* into the data field of 2pkt*, concatenating them,
and sets 3(chaos:pkt-nbytes 2pkt*)* accordingly.
.end_defun

.defun chaos:get-pkt
Allocates a 3pkt* for use by the user.
.end_defun

.defun chaos:return-pkt pkt
Returns 2pkt* to the system for reuse.  The packets given to you by 3chaos:get-pkt*,
3chaos:get-next-pkt* and 3chaos:simple* should be returned to the system in this way
when you are finished with them.
.end_defun

.defun chaos:send-pkt conn pkt &optional (opcode 3chaos:dat-op*)
Transmits 2pkt* on 2conn*.  2pkt* should have been allocated with 3chaos:get-pkt*
and then had its data field and n-bytes filled in.  2opcode* must be a data opcode
(#o200 or more) or EOF.  An error is signaled, with condition 3chaos:not-open-state*,
if 2conn* is not open.

Giving a 3pkt* to 3chaos:send-pkt* constitutes giving it back to the system.
You do not need to call 3chaos:return-pkt*.
.end_defun

.defun chaos:send-string conn &rest strings
Sends a data packet containing the concatenation of 2strings* as its data.
.end_defun

.defun chaos:send-unc-pkt conn pkt &optional pkt-number ack-number
Transmits 2pkt*, an UNC packet, on 2conn*.  The opcode, packet
number, and acknowledge number fields in the packet header are filled in
(the latter two only if the optional arguments are supplied).

See the MIT AI Lab memo entitled ``Chaosnet'' for more information on
using foreign protocols.
.end_defun

.defun chaos:may-transmit conn
A predicate that returns 3t* if there is any space in the window for
transmitting on 2conn*.  If the value is 3nil*, you may have to wait
if you try to transmit.  If the value is 3t*, you certainly do not have to wait.
.end_defun

.defun chaos:finish-conn conn &optional (whostate 3"Net Finish"*)
Waits until either all packets have been sent and acknowledged, or the connection ceases
to be open.  If successful, returns 3t*; if the connection goes into a bad state,
returns 3nil*.  2whostate* is the process state to display in the who-line
while waiting.
.end_defun

.defun chaos:conn-finished-p conn
3t* unless 2conn* is open and has sent packets which have not been acknowledged.
.end_defun

.defun chaos:get-next-pkt conn &optional (no-hang-p 3nil*) whostate check-conn-state
Returns the next input packet from 2conn*.  When you are done with the packet you
must give it back to the system with 3chaos:return-pkt*.  This can return
an RFC, CLS, or ANS packet, in addition to data, UNC, or EOF.

If no packets are available, 3nil* is returned
if 2no-hang-p* is 3t*.  Otherwise, 3chaos:get-next-pkt*
waits for a packet to come in or for the state to change.  2whostate* is displayed
in the who line; it defaults to 3"Chaosnet Input"*.

If 2check-conn-state* is non-3nil*, the connection state is checked
for validity before anything else is done, and an error is signaled if
the connection is in a bad state, with condition name
3chaos:host-down*, 3chaos:los-received-state*, or
3chaos:read-on-closed-connection*.  If 2check-conn-state* is 3nil*
and 2no-hang-p* is 3t*, 3nil* is returned.  2check-conn-state*
defaults to 3(not 2no-hang-p*)*.
.end_defun

.defun chaos:data-available conn
A predicate that returns 3t* if there any input packets available from 2conn*.
.end_defun

.need 1500
.nopara
Here are symbolic names for the opcodes that an applications programmer
needs to know about:

.defconst chaos:rfc-op
This special-purpose opcode is used for requesting a connection.  The
data consists of the contact name terminated by a space character,
followed optionally by additional data whose meaning is up to the server
for that contact name.
.end_defconst

.defconst chaos:brd-op
This special purpose opcode is for requesting responses from many hosts.
Currently, there is no user end for initiating these requests in the
Lisp Machine system, but the Lisp Machine can respond to such requests.
An incoming packet of this type is treated like an RFC packet.
.end_defconst

.defconst chaos:lsn-op
This special-purpose opcode is used when you ask to listen on a contact
name.  The data is just the contact name.  This packet is never actually
sent over the network, just kept in the Chaosnet software and compared
with the contact names in RFC packets that arrive.
.end_defconst

.defconst chaos:opn-op
This special-purpose opcode is used by the server process to accept the
request for a connection conveyed by an RFC packet.
Its data serves only internal functions.
.end_defconst

.defconst chaos:ans-op
This special-purpose opcode is used to send a simple reply.  The simple
reply is sent back in place of opening a connection.
.end_defconst

.defconst chaos:los-op
This special-purpose packet is what you receive if you try to use a
connection that has been broken.  Its data is a message explaining the
situation, which you can print for the user.
.end_defconst

.defconst chaos:cls-op
This special-purpose packet is used to close a connection.  Its data is
a message explaining the reason, and it can be printed for the user.
Note that you cannot count on receiving a CLS packet because it is
not retransmitted if it is lost.  If that happens you get a
LOS when you try to use the connection (thinking it is still open).

CLS packets are also used for refusing to open a connection in the
first place.
.end_defconst

.defconst chaos:eof-op
This special-purpose opcode is used to indicate the end of the data that
you really want to transmit.  When this packet is acknowledged by the
other process, you know that all the real data was received properly.
You can wait for this with 3chaos:finish*.
The EOF packet carries no data itself.
.end_defconst

.defconst chaos:dat-op
This is opcode 200 (octal), which is the normal opcode used for 8-bit
user data.  Some protocols use multiple data opcodes in the range 200
through 277, but simple protocols that do not need to distinguish
types of packets just use opcode 200.
.end_defconst

.section Connection Interrupts

.defun chaos:interrupt-function conn
This attribute of a 3conn* is a function to be called when certain
events occur on this connection.  Normally this is 3nil*, which means
not to call any function, but you can use 3setf* to store a function
here.  Since the function is called in the Chaosnet background process,
it should not do any operations that might have to wait for the network,
since that could permanently hang the background process.

The function's first argument is one of the following symbols, giving the
reason for the interrupt.  The function's second argument is 2conn*.
Additional arguments may be present depending on the reason.  The possible
reasons are:
.table 3
.item :input
A packet has arrived for the connection when it had no input packets queued.
It is now possible to do 3chaos:get-next-pkt* without having to wait.
There are no additional arguments.

.item :output
An acknowledgement has arrived for the connection and made space in the window
when formerly it was full.  Additional output packets may now be transmitted
with 3chaos:send-pkt* without having to wait.
There are no additional arguments.

.item :change-of-state
The state of the connection has changed.  The third argument to the function
is the symbol for the new state.
.end_table
.end_defun

.defun chaos:read-pkts conn
Some interrupt functions want to look at the queued input packets of a connection
when they get a 3:input* interrupt.  3chaos:read-pkts* returns the first packet
available for reading.  Successive packets can be found by following 3chaos:pkt-link*.
.end_defun

.defun chaos:pkt-link pkt
Lists of packets in the NCP are threaded together by storing each packet
in the 3chaos:pkt-link* of its predecessor.  The list is terminated with 3nil*.
.end_defun

.section Chaosnet Errors

.defflavor-condition sys:network-error (3error*)
All errors from the Chaosnet code use flavors built on this one.
.end_defflavor-condition

.subsection Local Problems

.defflavor-condition sys:local-network-error (3sys:network-error* 3error*)
This flavor is used for problems in connection with the Chaosnet
that have entirely to do with what is going on in this Lisp Machine.
.end_defflavor-condition

.defcondition sys:network-resources-exhausted (3sys:local-network-error* 3sys:network-error* 3error*)
Signaled when some local resource in the NCP was exhausted.  Most
likely, there are too many Chaosnet connections and the connection table
is full.
.end_defcondition

.defcondition sys:unknown-address (3sys:local-network-error* 3sys:network-error* 3error*)
The 2address* argument to 3chaos:connect* or some similar function was not recognizable.
The 3:address* operation on the condition instance returns the address that was supplied.
.end_defcondition

.subsection Problems Involving Other Machines' Actions

.defflavor-condition sys:remote-network-error (3sys:network-error* 3error*)
This flavor is used for network problems that involve the
actions (or lack of them) of other machines.
It is often useful to test for as a condition name.

The operations 3:connection* and 3:foreign-host* return the
3chaos:conn* object and the host object for the foreign host.
.end_defflavor-condition

All the condition names listed below imply the presence of
3sys:remote-network-error*, 3sys:network-error* and
3error*.  For brevity, these are not mentioned in the
individual descriptions.

Every instance of 3sys:remote-network-error* is either a
3sys:connection-error* or a 3sys:bad-connection-state*.

.defcondition sys:connection-error
This condition name categorizes failure to complete a connection.
.end_defcondition

.defcondition sys:bad-connection-state
This condition name categorizes errors where an existing, valid connection
becomes invalid.  The error is not signaled until you try to use the connection.
.end_defcondition

.defcondition sys:host-not-responding
This condition name categorizes errors where no packets whatever are
received from the foreign host, making it seem likely that that host or
the network is down.
.end_defcondition

.defcondition sys:host-not-responding-during-connection (3sys:connection-error* 3sys:host-not-responding*)
This condition is signaled when a host does not respond while it is
being asked to make a connection.
.end_defcondition

.defcondition sys:no-server-up (3sys:connection-error*)
This condition is signaled by certain functions which request service from
any available machine which can provide it, if no such machine is
responding or no host is listed as a server for a particular service.
.end_defcondition

.defcondition sys:host-stopped-responding (3sys:bad-connection-state* 3sys:host-not-responding*)
This condition is signaled when a host does not respond even though a
connection to it already exists.
.end_defcondition

.defcondition sys:connection-refused (3sys:connection-error*)
This is signaled when a connection is refused.

The 3:reason* operation on the condition instance returns the reason
specified in the CLS packet (a string) or 3nil* if no reason was
given.

Note that many Chaosnet implementations do not send CLS packets when
there is no process or server listening for a contact name.  Also, it is
possible for the CLS packet to get lost in the network, so that the
error actually signalled is not unlikely to be 
3sys:host-not-responding-during-connection*.
.end_defcondition

.defcondition sys:connection-closed (3sys:bad-connection-state*)
This is signaled when you try to send on a connection which has been closed
by the other host.

The 3:reason* operation on the condition instance returns the reason
specified in the CLS packet (a string) or 3nil* if no reason was
given.
.end_defcondition

.defcondition sys:connection-lost (3sys:bad-connection-state*)
This is signaled when you try to use a connection on which a LOS packet was received.

The 3:reason* operation on the condition instance returns the reason
specified in the CLS packet (a string) or 3nil* if no reason was
given.
.end_defcondition

.defcondition sys:connection-no-more-data (3sys:bad-connection-state*)
This is signaled when you try to read from a connection which has been
closed by the other host, when there are no packets left to be read.
(It is no error to read from a connection which has been closed, if you
have not yet read all the packets which arrived, including the CLS
packet).

The 3:reason* operation on the condition instance returns the reason
specified in the CLS packet (a string) or 3nil* if no reason was
given.
.end_defcondition

.section Information and Control

.defun chaos:host-up-p host &optional (timeout 3180.*)
3t* if 2host* responds over the Chaosnet within 2timeout* sixtieths of
a second, otherwise 3nil*.  The value is always 3nil* if 2host*
is not on the Chaosnet.
.end_defun

.defun chaos:up-hosts host-list &optional number-of-hosts (timeout 3250.*)
Returns a list of all the hosts in 2host-list* which are currently responding
over the Chaosnet.  2host-list* is a list of host names and/or host objects.
The value is always a list of host objects, possibly 3nil* for none of them.

If 2number-of-hosts* is non-3nil*, it should be a positive integer; when that
many hosts have responded, 3chaos:up-hosts* returns right away without
bothering to listen for replies from the rest.

2timeout* is an integer; if a host fails to respond for that many
sixtieths of a second, it is assumed to be down.
.end_defun

.defun chaos:host-data &optional host
2host* may be a number or a known host name, and defaults to the local host.  Two
values are returned.  The first value is the host name and the second is
the host number.  If the host is a number not in the table, it is asked its name
using the 3STATUS* protocol; if no response is received the name
3"Unknown"* is returned.
.end_defun

.defun chaos:print-conn conn &optional (short 3t*)
Prints everything the system knows about the connection.  If 2short* is 3nil* it
also prints everything the system knows about each queued input and output packet
on the connection.
.end_defun

.defun chaos:print-pkt pkt &optional (short 3nil*)
Prints everything the system knows about the packet, except its data field.
If 2short* is 3t*, only the first line of the information is printed.
.end_defun

.defun chaos:print-all-pkts pkt &optional (short 3t*)
Calls 3chaos:print-pkt* on 2pkt* and all packets on the threaded list emanating
from it.
.end_defun

.defun chaos:status
Prints the hardware status.  (Currently works for the CADR only.)
.end_defun

.defun chaos:reset
Resets the hardware and software and turns off Chaosnet communication.
.end_defun

.defun chaos:assure-enabled
Turns on Chaosnet communication if it is not already on.  It is normally
always on unless you call one of the functions in this section.
.end_defun

.defun chaos:enable
Resets the hardware and turns on Chaosnet communication.
.end_defun

.defun chaos:disable
Resets the hardware and turns off Chaosnet communication.
.end_defun

.defun chaos:show-routing-table host &optional (stream 3*standard-output*)
Print out 2host*'s routing table onto 2stream*.
.end_defun

.defun chaos:show-routing-path &key (from 3si:local-host*) to (stream 3*standard-output*)
Show how a packet would get from 2from* to 2to*.  For this to
work when the hosts are on different subnets, the bridge must respond to
the 3DUMP-ROUTING-TABLE* request.
.end_defun

.defconst chaos:my-address
The sixteen bit Chaosnet address of this Lisp Machine.  On the CADR, this
is set by reading
a location off the Chaosnet (I/O) board.  On a Lambda, this is set by
looking at the name of the disk pack, and using that as a host name to
get the Chaosnet address.  (This is because a Lambda talks Chaosnet
through an Ethernet interface, which has a pre-assigned address of its
own.)
.end_defconst

.defconst chaos:my-subnet
The high eight bits of 3chaos:my-address*.
.end_defconst

.defconst chaos:routing-table
This is an 3art-16b* array which contains for each subnet the address
of a bridge which is the best way of getting to that subnet.  Since
(currently) Lisp Machines can only have one interface to the network,
the addresses in the table all contain the same subnet, namely, the name
of 3chaos:my-address*.
.end_defconst

.defconst chaos:maximum-routing-cost
The maximum cost that a route can be in the routing table.  Subnets with
a cost greater than this do not appear in the Peek Chaosnet display
.end_defconst

.defconst chaos:routing-table-cost
This is an 3art-16b* array which contains for each subnet the cost for
getting to that subnet.
.end_defconst

.defvar chaos:*receive-broadcast-packets-p*
If not 3nil* (the default), broadcast packets are responded to.
.end_defvar

.defvar chaos:*brd-history*
A list of elements of the form 3(*2contact-name address*3)*
recording what hosts have been contacting this machine with broadcast
requests.
.end_defvar

.defvar chaos:*brd-pkts-in*
The number of broadcast packets (opcode 3BRD-OP*) that have been
received.  This should never be less than 3(length chaos:*brd-history*)*.
.end_defvar

The PEEK program has a mode that displays the status of all of the Lisp
Machine's Chaosnet connections, and various other information, in a
continuously updating fashion.

.section Higher-Level Protocols

This section briefly documents some of the higher-level protocols of
the most general interest.  There are quite a few other protocols which
are too specialized to mention here.  All protocols other than the
3STATUS* protocol are optional and are only implemented by those
hosts that need them.  All hosts are required to implement the
3STATUS* protocol since it is used for network maintenance.

The site files tell the Lisp Machine which hosts at your site implement
certain higher-level protocols.  See (site-files).

.subsection Status

All network nodes, even bridges, are required to answer RFC's with contact
name 7STATUS*, returning an ANS packet in a simple transaction.  This
protocol is primarily used for network maintenance.  The answer to a
7STATUS* request should be generated by the Network Control Program,
rather than by starting up a server process, in order to provide rapid
response.

The 7STATUS* protocol is used to determine whether a host is up,
to determine whether an operable path through the network exists between
two hosts, to monitor network error statistics, and to debug new Network
Control Programs and new Chaosnet hardware.  The 3hostat* function
on the Lisp Machine uses this protocol.

The first 32 bytes of the ANS contain the name of the node, padded on
the right with zero bytes.  The rest of the packet contains blocks of
information expressed in 16-bit and 32-bit words, low byte first
(little-endian convention).  The low-order half of a 32-bit word comes
first.  Since ANS packets contain 8-bit data (not 16-bit), big-endian
machines such as PDP-10s have to shuffle the bytes explicitly when
using this protocol.  The first 16-bit word in a block is its
identification.  The second 16-bit word is the number of 16-bit words
to follow.  The remaining words in the block depend on the
identification.

This is the only block type currently defined.  All items are optional,
according to the count field, and extra items not defined here may be
present and should be ignored.  Note that items after the first two
are 32-bit words.
.table 1
.item word 0
A number between 400 and 777 octal.  This is 400 plus a subnet number.
This block contains information on this host's direct connection to
that subnet.

.item word 1
The number of 16-bit words to follow, usually 16.

.item words 2-3
The number of packets received from this subnet.

.item words 4-5
The number of packets transmitted to this subnet.

.item words 6-7
The number of transmissions to this subnet aborted by collisions or
because the receiver was busy.

.item words 8-9
The number of incoming packets from this subnet lost because the
host had not yet read a previous packet out of the interface and consequently
the interface could not capture the packet.

.item words 10-11
The number of incoming packets from this subnet with CRC errors.
These were either transmitted wrong or damaged in transmission.

.item words 12-13
The number of incoming packets from this subnet that had no CRC
error when received, but did have an error after being read out of
the packet buffer.  This error indicates either a hardware problem with the
packet buffer or an incorrect packet length.

.item words 14-15
The number of incoming packets from this subnet that were rejected
due to incorrect length (typically not a multiple of 16 bits).

.item words 16-17
The number of incoming packets from this subnet rejected for
other reasons (e.g. too short to contain a header, garbage byte-count,
forwarded too many times.)
.end_table

If word 0, the identification, is a number between 0 and 377 octal, this is an obsolete
format of block.  The identification is a subnet number and the counts are as
above except that they are only 16 bits instead of 32, and consequently may overflow.
This format should no longer be sent by any hosts.

Identification numbers of 1000 octal and up are reserved for future use.

.subsection Routing Information

For network and NCP debugging, this RFC/ANS protocol should be
implemented.  The contact name is 7DUMP-ROUTING-TABLE*, and the
response is an ANS packet whose words alternately contain a
method to getting to a subnet, and the cost.
If the method is zero, then the machine knows of no way to get to
that subnet.  If the method is positive and less than 400 (octal),
it is an interface of some kind to that subnet.
If the method is 400 (octal) or greater, this is actually a bridge
(host) off which the machine is bouncing packets destined for the
subnet.

.subsection Telnet and Supdup

The Telnet and Supdup protocols of the Arpanet exist in
identical form in Chaosnet.  These protocols allow access to a
computer system as an interactive terminal from another network node.

The contact names are 7TELNET* and 7SUPDUP*.  The direct borrowing of
the Telnet and Supdup protocols was eased by their use of 8-bit byte
streams and of only a single connection.  Note that these protocols define
their own character sets, which differ from each other and from the
Chaosnet standard character set.

For the Telnet protocol, refer to the RFC 854 (An RFC is a network
document put out by the NIC or Network Information Center.)  For the Supdup
protocol, see MIT AI Lab memo 644.

Chaosnet contains no counterpart of the INR/INS attention-getting feature
of the Arpanet.  The Telnet protocol sends a packet with opcode 201 octal in
place of the INS signal.  This is a controlled packet and hence does not
provide the ``out of band'' feature of the Arpanet INS, however it is
satisfactory for the Telnet `interrupt process' and `discard output'
operations on the kinds of hosts attached to Chaosnet.

.subsection File Access

The FILE protocol is primarily used by Lisp Machines to access files on
network file servers.  ITS, TOPS-20, Tenex, Unix, VMS, and Lisp Machines are
equipped to act as file servers.  A user end for the file protocol also
exists for all the operating systems mentioned (except VMS) and
is used for general-purpose file transfer.  For complete documentation
on the file protocol, see 3SYS: DOC; FILE TEXT*.  The Arpanet file
transfer protocols have not been implemented on the Chaosnet (except
through the Arpanet gateway described below).

.subsection Mail

The MAIL protocol is used to transmit inter-user messages through the Chaosnet.
The Arpanet mail protocol in FTP was not used because of its complexity
and poor
state of documentation.  This simple protocol is by no means the last word
in mail protocols; however, it is adequate for the mail systems we presently
possess.

The sender of mail connects to contact name 7MAIL* and establishes a stream connection.
It then sends the names of all the recipients to which the mail is to be sent
at (or via) the server host.  The names are sent one to a line and terminated
by a blank line (two carriage returns in a row).  The Lisp Machine character
set is used.  A reply (see below) is immediately returned for each recipient.
A recipient is typically just the name of a user, but it can be a user-atsign-host
sequence or anything else acceptable to the mail system on the server machine.
After sending the recipients, the sender sends the text of the message, terminated
by an EOF.  After the mail has been successfully swallowed, a reply is sent.
After the sender of mail has read the reply, both sides close the connection.

In the MAIL protocol, a reply is a signal from the server to the user
(or sender) indicating success or failure.  The first character of a reply
is a plus sign for success, a minus sign for permanent failure (e.g. no such
user exists), or a percent sign for temporary failure (e.g. unable to receive message
because disk is full).  The rest of a reply is a human-readable character string
explaining the situation, followed by a carriage return.

The message text transmitted through the mail protocol normally contains a header
formatted in the Arpanet standard fashion.  Refer to the Arpanet Protocols Handbook.

The SMTP protocol can also be used over Chaosnet; the contact name is
7SMTP*.  See RFC 821 for details.

.subsection Send

The SEND protocol is used to transmit an interactive message (requiring
immediate attention) between users.  The sender connects to contact name
7SEND* at the machine to which the recipient is logged in.  The remainder of
the RFC packet contains the name of the person being sent to.  A stream
connection is opened and the message is transmitted, followed by an EOF.
Both sides close after following the end-of-data protocol described in (safe-eof-protocol).
The fact that the RFC was responded to affirmatively indicates that the
recipient is in fact present and accepting messages.  The message text should begin
with a suitable header, naming the user that sent the message.  The standard
for such headers, not currently adhered to by all hosts, is one line formatted
as in the following example:
.lisp
Moon@MIT-MC 6/15/81 02:20:17
.end_lisp
Automatic reply to the sender can be implemented by searching for the first
`@' and using the SEND protocol to the host following the `@' with the
argument preceding it.

.subsection Name

The Name/Finger protocol of the Arpanet exists in identical form
on the Chaosnet.  Both Lisp Machines and timesharing machines support this
protocol and provide a display of the user(s) currently logged in to them.

The contact name is 7NAME*, which can be followed by a space and a string of
arguments like the ``command line'' of the Arpanet Name protocol.  A stream
connection is established and the ``finger'' display is output in Lisp
Machine character set, followed by an EOF.

Lisp Machines also support the FINGER protocol, a simple-transaction version
of the NAME protocol.  An RFC with contact name 7FINGER* is transmitted and
the response is an ANS containing the following items of information separated
by carriage returns: the logged-in user ID, the location of the terminal, the
idle time in minutes or hours-colon-minutes, the user's full name, and
the user's group affiliation.

.subsection Time

The Time protocol allows a host such as a Lisp Machine that has no
long-term timebase to ask the time of day.  An RFC to contact name
7TIME* evokes an ANS containing the universal time as a 32-bit
number in four 8-bit bytes, least-significant byte first.

.defun chaos:host-time &optional hosts
Returns either a universal time, or a string explaining why the time
couldn't be found out, from one of 2hosts*.  2Hosts* defaults to
the list of Chaosnet time server hosts.
.end_defun

.defun chaos:print-host-times &optional hosts (stream 3*standard-output**)
Print out on 2stream* the times given by 2hosts*.  Any host that
returns a time that is more than three minutes off this hosts time will
have its repsonse marked with ``!''  2Hosts* defaults to the list of
Chaosnet time server hosts.
.end_defun

.subsection Time Server Control

For a time server that does not have any other way to correct its own
time (usually because it is a bridge), that host should support this
simple way of accepting a request to reset its own timebase.  The contact
name is 7RESET-TIME-SERVER*, and the response (on successful
completion) is an ANS.  Following such a request, if the network is the
only source of a timebase, it may be wise to
immediately disable the 7TIME* server, wait about 20 seconds, and then
attempt to get the time from the network.  This may prevent the host
from getting bad times from other machines that were ``infected'' with
it.

.defun chaos:reset-time-server host
Reset the network time server of 2host*.  It will try to tell you the
time it gets afterward, if possible.
.end_defun

.subsection Uptime

This is similar to the TIME protocol, except that the contact
name is 7UPTIME*, and the time returned is actually an interval (in
seconds) describing how long the host has been up.

.defun host-uptime host &optional (stream 3*standard-output**)
Return the number of seconds that 2host* has been up, and print that
out in human-readable form if 2stream* is not 3nil*.
.end_defun

.defun uptime &optional (stream 3*standard-output**) hosts
Print out the uptimes for 2hosts* (which if not supplied defaults to
all Chaosnet hosts) onto 2stream*.
.end_defun

.subsection Internet Gateway
.setq arpanet-gateway section-page

This protocol allows a Chaosnet host to access almost any service on
the Internet.  The gateway server runs on each ITS host that is connected
to both networks.  It creates an Internet connection and a Chaosnet connection
and forwards data bytes from one to the other.  It also provides for a one-way
auxiliary connection, used for the data connection of the Arpanet File Transfer Protocol.

The RFC packet contains a contact name of 7TCP*, a space, the name
of the Internet host to be connected to, optionally followed by a space
and the contact-socket number in octal, which defaults to 1 if omitted.
The name of host can also be an Internet-format address.
The bi-directional 8-bit connection is made by connecting to the host
with TCP.

If a data packet with opcode 201 (octal) is received, an Arpanet INS
signal is transmitted.
Any data bytes in this packet are transmitted
normally.  (This does nothing in the current server, since TCP
does not define an interrupt signal.)

If a data packet with opcode 210 (octal) is received, an auxiliary
connection on each network is opened.  The first eight data bytes are
the Chaosnet contact name for the auxiliary connection; the user should
send an RFC with this name to the server.  The next four data bytes are the
TCP socket number to be connected to, in the wrong order, most-significant
byte first.  The byte-size of the auxiliary connection is 8 bits.

The normal closing of an TCP connection corresponds to an EOF packet.
Closing due to an error, such as Host Dead, corresponds to a CLS packet.

.subsection Host Table

The 7HOSTAB* protocol may be used to access tables of host addresses
on other networks, such as the Arpanet or Internet.  Servers for this protocol
currently exist for Tenex, TOPS-20, ITS, and Lisp Machines.

The user connects to contact name 7HOSTAB*, undertakes a number of
transactions, then closes the connection.  Each transaction is initiated
by the user transmitting a host name followed by a carriage return.  The
server responds with information about that host, terminated with an EOF,
and is then ready for another transaction.  The server's response
consists of a number of attributes of the host.  Each attribute consists
of an identifying name, a space character, the value of the attribute,
and a carriage return.  Values may be strings (free of carriage returns
and 2not* surrounded by double-quotes) or octal numbers.
Attribute names and most values are in upper case.  There can be more than
one attribute with the same name; for example, a host may have more than
one name or more than one network address.

The standard attribute names defined now are as follows.  Note that more
are likely to be added in the future.

.table 7
.item ERROR
The value is an error message.  The only error one might expect
to get is ``no such host''.

.item NAME
The value is a name of the host.  There may be more than one 7NAME*
attribute; the first one is always the official name, and any additional
names are nicknames.

.item MACHINE-TYPE
The value is the type of machine, such as 7LISPM*, 7PDP10*, etc.

.item SYSTEM-TYPE
The value is the type of software running on the machine,
such as 7LISPM*, 7ITS*, etc.

.item ARPA
The value is an address of the host on the Arpanet, in the form
2host*/2imp*.  The two numbers are decimal.

.item CHAOS
The value is an address of the host on Chaosnet, as an octal number.

.item DIAL
The value is an address of the host on Dialnet, as a telephone number.

.item LCS
The value is an address of the host on the LCSnet, as two octal numbers
separated by a slash.

.item SU
The value is an address of the host on the SUnet, in the form
2net*#2host*.  The two numbers are octal.

.end_table

.subsection Dover

A press file may be sent to the Dover printer at MIT by connecting to contact
name 3DOVER* at host 3AI-CHAOS-11*.  This host provides a protocol
translation service that translates from Chaosnet stream protocol to
the 3EFTP* protocol spoken by the Dover printer.  Only one file at
a time can be sent to the Dover, so an attempt to use this service may
be refused by a CLS packet containing the string 3"BUSY"*.
Once the connection has been established, the press file is transmitted
as a sequence of 8-bit bytes in data packets (opcode 200).  It is necessary
to provide packets rapidly enough to keep the Dover's program (Spruce)
from timing out; a packet every five seconds suffices.  Of course, packets
are normally transmitted much more rapidly.

Once the file has been transmitted, an EOF packet must be sent.
The transmitter must wait for that EOF to be acknowledged, then send a
second one, and then close the connection.  The two EOF's are
necessary to provide the proper connection-closing sequence for the
3EFTP* protocol.  Once the press file has been transmitted to the
Dover in this way and stored on the Dover's local disk, it will be
processed, prepared for printing, and printed.

If an error message is returned by the Dover while the press file is
being transmitted, it is reported back through the Chaosnet as a
LOS containing the text of the error message.  Such errors are
fairly common; the sender of the press file should be prepared to retry
the operation a few times.

Most programs that send press files to the Dover first wait for the
Dover to be idle, using the Foreign Protocol mechanism of Chaosnet to
check the status of the Dover.  This is optional, but is courteous to
other users since it prevents printing from being held up while
additional files are sent to the Dover and queued on its local disk.

It would be possible to send to a press file to the Dover using its
3EFTP* protocol through the Foreign Protocol mechanism, rather than
using the 3AI-CHAOS-11* gateway service.  This is not usually done
because 3EFTP*, which requires a handshake for every packet, tends to
be very slow on a timesharing system.

.subsection Remote Disk

The Remote Disk server exists on Lisp Machines to allow other machines
to refer to or modify the contents of the Lisp Machine's disk.
Primarily this is used for printing and editing the disk label.

After first establishing a connection to contact name 7REMOTE-DISK*,
the user process sends commands as packets which contain a line of text,
ending with a 3Return* character.  The text consists of a command name, a
space, and arguments interpreted according to the command.  The server
processing the command may send disk data to the user, or it may read
successive packets and write them to the disk.  It is up to the user to
know how many packets of disk data to read or send after each command.
The commands are:
.table 3
.item READ 2unit* 2block* 2n-blocks*
Reads 2n-blocks* of data from disk 2unit* starting at 2block* and
transmits their contents to the user process.

.item WRITE 2unit* 2block* 2n-blocks*
Reads data from the net connection and stores it into 2n-blocks* disk
blocks on disk 2unit* starting at 2block*.

.item SAY 2text*
Prints 2text*, which is simply all the rest of the line following 3SAY*,
on the screen of the server host as a notification.
.end_table

Each disk block is transmitted as three packets, the first two
containing the data for 121 (decimal) Lisp Machine words, and the third
containing the data for the remaining 14 (decimal) words of the disk
block.  Each packet's data ends with a checksum made by adding together
all the 8-bit bytes of the actual disk data stored in the packet.

.subsection The Eval Server

The Eval server is available on Lisp Machines with contact name
7EVAL*.  It provides a read-eval-print loop which reads and prints
using the Chaosnet connection.  The data consists of text in the ASCII
character set.

Each time a complete s-expression arrives, the Eval
server reads it, evaluates it and prints the list of values back onto
the network connection, followed by a CRLF.  There is no way for the
user process to tell the end of the output for a particular
s-expression; the usual application is simply to copy all the output to
a user's terminal asynchronously.

The Eval server is disabled when the Lisp Machine is logged in, unless
the user requests to enable it.

.defun chaos:eval-server-on mode
Turn the Eval server on this Lisp Machine on or off.
2mode* can be 3t* (on), 3nil* (off), or 3:notify* (on, but
notify the user when a connection is made).
.end_defun

.section Using Higher Level Protocols

.defun qsend user &optional text
Sends a message to another user.  3qsend* is different from 3mail* because it
sends the message immediately; it will appear within seconds on the other user's
screen, rather than being saved in her mail file.

2user* should be a string of the form 3"2username7@*hostname*"*;
2host* is the name of the Lisp Machine or timesharing system the user
is currently logged-in to.  Multiple recipients separated by commas are
also allowed.  2text* is a string which is the message.  If 2text*
is not specified, you are prompted to type in a message.

Unlike 3mail* and 3bug*, 3qsend* does not put up a window to allow
you to compose the message; it just reads it from the input stream.  Use
Converse if you wish to compose sends in the editor.  Converse can be
invoked by typing 3System* 3C*.  If you have started typing in a message to
3qsend*, you can switch to Converse by typing 3Control-Meta-E*
(``Edit'').  The text you have typed so far is transferred into
Converse.

3qsend* does give you the ability to insert the text of the last
message you received.  Type 3Control-Meta-Y* to do this.
.end_defun

.defun reply &optional text
.defun1 qreply &optional text
Sends 2text* as a message to the last user who sent a message to you,
like 3qsend* with an appropriate first argument provided.
The two names are synonymous.
.end_defun

.defun chaos:shout &optional message
Sends 2message* to every Lisp Machine at your site.
If you do not specify 2message*, it is read from 3*standard-input**.
.end_defun

.defun print-sends
Reprints any messages that have been received.  This is useful if you want to see
a message again.
.end_defun

.defun supdup &optional host
2host* may be a string or symbol, which is taken as a host name,
or a number, which is taken as a host number.  If no 2host* is
given, the machine you are logged-in to is assumed.
This function opens a connection to the host
over the Chaosnet using the Supdup protocol, and allows the Lisp
Machine to be used as a terminal for any ITS, UNIX or TOPS-20 system.

To give commands to 3supdup*, type the 3Network* key followed by one character.
Type 3Network* followed by 3Help* for documentation.
.end_defun

.defun telnet &optional host simulate-imlac
3telnet* is similar to 3supdup* but uses the Arpanet-standard Telnet
protocol, simulating a printing terminal rather than a display terminal.
.end_defun

.defun hostat &rest hosts
Asks each of the 2hosts* for its status using the 7STATUS* protocol,
and prints the results.  If no hosts are specified, all hosts on the
Chaosnet are asked.  Hosts can be specified either by name or by number.

For each host, a line is output that either says that the host is not
responding or gives metering information for the host's network
attachments.  If a host is not responding, that usually means that it is down
or there is no such host at that address.  A Lisp Machine can fail to respond
if it is looping inside 3without-interrupts* or paging extremely heavily,
such that it is simply unable to respond within a reasonable amount of time.
.end_defun

.defun finger &optional spec (stream 3*standard-output**)
.defun1 whois &optional spec (stream 3*standard-output**)
Prints brief (3finger*) or verbose (3whois*) information about a user
or users specified by 2spec*, on 2stream*.  2spec* can be a user
name, 3@* followed by a host name, or a user name, 3@*, and a host
name.  If there is no host name, the default login host is used.  If
there is no user name, all users on the host are described.
.lisp
.exdent 96 Examples:
(finger "@OZ")
(whois "RMS@OZ")
.end_lisp
.end_defun

.defun chaos:finger-all-lms &optional stream print-free return-free hosts
Prints a line of information about the user of each Lisp Machine in
2hosts* (the default is all Lisp Machines at this site) on 2stream*
(default is 3*standard-output**).

If 2print-free* is non-3nil*, information on free Lisp Machines and
nonresponding Lisp Machines is also printed.

If 2return-free* is non-3nil*, then this function returns two
values, the first a list of host objects of free Lisp Machines, the
second a list of host objects of nonresponding Lisp Machines.
.end_defun

.defun chaos:user-logged-into-host-p username host
Returns 3t* if there is a user named 2username* logged in on
2host* (a host name or host object).
.end_defun

.defun chaos:find-hosts-or-lispms-logged-in-as-user user hosts
Return a list of host objects for hosts on which 2user* is logged in.
All Lisp Machines at this site are checked, and so are 2hosts* (which
are presumably non-Lisp machines).
.end_defun

.defun tv:close-all-servers reason
Close the connections of all network servers on this Lisp Machine,
giving 2reason* (a string) as the reason in the CLS packet.

Note that PEEK has a mode that displays information on the active
network servers.
.end_defun
