.c This file is part of the Lisp Machine manual.	-*-Bolio-*-

.c Need examples!

.chapter Stack Groups
.cindex stack group
.setq stack-group section-page
.setq stack-group-chapter chapter-number
'cindex coroutine

	A 2stack group* (usually abbreviated `SG') is a type of Lisp
object useful for implementation of certain advanced control structures
such as coroutines and generators.  Processes, which are a kind of
coroutine, are built on top of stack groups (see (process)).  A stack
group represents a computation and its internal state, including the
Lisp stack.

	At any time, the computation being performed by the Lisp
Machine is associated with one stack group, called the 2current* or
2running* stack group.  The operation of making some stack group be
the current stack group is called a 2resumption* or a 2stack group
switch*; the previously running stack group is said to have 2resumed* the new
stack group.  The 2resume* operation has two parts: first, the state
of the running computation is saved away inside the current stack group,
and secondly the state saved in the new stack group is restored, and the
new stack group is made current.  Then the computation of the new stack
group resumes its course.

.cindex regular pdl
.cindex special pdl
	The stack group itself holds a great deal of state information.
It contains the control stack, or 2regular PDL*.  The control stack is
what you are shown by the backtracing commands of the error handler
(3Control-B*, 3Meta-B*, and 3Control-Meta-B*); it remembers the
function which is running, its caller, its caller's caller, etc., and
the point of execution of each function (the 2return address* of each
function).  A stack group also contains the dynamic environment stack,
or 2special PDL*.  The name `stack group' derives from the existence
of these two stacks.  Finally, the stack group contains various internal
state information (contents of machine registers and so on).

When the stack group is running, the special PDL contains all the
dynamic bindings that are shadowed by other bindings in this stack
group; bindings that are current reside in the symbols' value cells.
When the stack group is not running, all of the dynamic bindings it has
made reside in its special PDL.  Switching to a stack group moves the
current bindings from the special PDL to the symbol value cells,
exchanging them with the global or other shadowed bindings.  Switching
out of a stack group does the reverse process.  Note that
3unwind-protect* handlers are 2not* run by a stack-group switch (see
3let-globally*, (let-globally-fun)).

	Each stack group is a separate environment for purposes of function
calling, throwing, dynamic variable binding, and condition signalling.  All
stack groups run in the same address space; thus they share the same Lisp
data and the same global (not lambda-bound) variables.

.cindex presetting stack groups
.cindex initial function
When a new stack group is created, it is empty: it doesn't contain the state
of any computation, so it can't be resumed.  In order to get things going,
the stack group must be set to an initial state.  This is done by 2presetting*
the stack group.  To preset a stack group, you supply a function and a set
of arguments.  The stack group is placed in such a state that when it is
first resumed it will apply this function to those arguments.  The function is
called the 2initial function* of the stack group.

.section Resuming of Stack Groups

The interesting thing that happens to stack groups is that they resume
each other.  When one stack group resumes a second stack group, the
current state of Lisp execution is saved away in the first stack group
and is restored from the second stack group.  Resuming is also called
2switching stack groups*.

At any time, there is one
stack group associated with the current computation; it is called the
current stack group.  The computations associated with other stack
groups have their states saved away in memory and are not
computing.  So the only stack group that can do anything at all, in
particular resuming other stack groups, is the current one.

You can look at things from the point of view of one computation.
Suppose it is running along, and it resumes some stack group.  The state
of the computation state is saved away into its own stack group, and the
computation associated with the called stack group starts up.  The
original computation lies dormant in the original stack group, while
other computations go around resuming each other, until finally the
original stack group is resumed by someone.  Then the computation is
restored from the stack group and gets to run again.

There are several ways that the current stack group can resume other
stack groups.  This section describes all of them.

.cindex resumer
Each stack group records a 2resumer* which is 3nil*
or another stack group.  Some forms of resuming examine and alter the
resumer of some stack groups.

Resuming has another ability: it can transmit a Lisp object from the
old stack group to the new stack group.  Each stack group specifies
a value to transmit whenever it resumes another stack group; whenever
a stack group is resumed, it receives a value.

In the descriptions below, let 2c* stand for the current stack group,
2s* stand for some other stack group, and 2x* stand for any
arbitrary Lisp object.

Stack groups can be used as functions.  They accept one argument.  If
2c* calls 2s* as a function with one argument 2x*, then 2s* is
resumed, and the object transmitted is 2x*.  When 2c* is resumed
(usually--but not necessarily--by 2s*), the object transmitted by that
resumption is returned as the value of the call to 2s*.  This is
one of the simple ways to resume a stack group: call it as a function.
The value you transmit is the argument to the function, and the value
you receive is the value returned from the function.  Furthermore, this
form of resuming sets 2s*'s resumer to be 2c*.

Another way to resume a stack group is to use 3stack-group-return*.
Rather than allowing you to specify which stack group to resume, this
function always resumes the resumer of the current stack group.  Thus,
this is a good way to go back to the stack group which called the
current one, assuming that this was done through a function call.
3stack-group-return* takes one argument which is the object to
transmit.  It returns when something resumes the current stack group, and
returns one value, the object that was transmitted by that resumption.
3stack-group-return* does not change the resumer of any stack group.

The most fundamental way to do resuming is with 3stack-group-resume*,
which takes two arguments: the stack group, and a value to transmit.
It returns when someone resumes the current stack group, returning
the value that was transmitted by that resumption,
and does not affect any stack group's resumer.

If the initial function of 2c* attempts to return a value 2x*, the
regular kind of Lisp function return cannot take place, since the
function did not have any caller (it got there when the stack group was
initialized).  So instead of normal function returning, a ``stack group
return'' happens.  2c*'s resumer is resumed, and the value transmitted
is 2x*.  2c* is left in a state (``exhausted'') from which it cannot
be resumed again; any attempt to resume it signals an error.  Presetting
it will make it work again.

Those are the ``voluntary'' forms of stack group switch; a resumption
happens because the computation said it should.  There are also two
``involuntary'' forms, in which another stack group is resumed without the
explicit request of the running program.

If an error occurs, the current stack group resumes the error handler stack
group.  The value transmitted is partially descriptive of the error, and
the error handler looks inside the saved state of the erring stack group
to get the rest of the information.  The error handler recovers from the
error by changing the saved state of the erring stack group and then
resuming it.

When certain events occur, typically a 1-second clock tick, a 2sequence
break* occurs.  This forces the current stack group to resume a special
stack group called the 2scheduler* (see (scheduler)).  The scheduler
implements processes by resuming, one after another, the stack group of each
process that is ready to run.

.defvar current-stack-group-resumer
Is the resumer of the current stack group.
.end_defvar

.defvar current-stack-group
Is the stack group which is currently running.  A program can use this
variable to get its hands on its own stack group.
.end_defvar

.section Stack Group States

A stack group has a 2state*, which controls what it will do when it
is resumed.  The code number for the state is returned by the function
3sys:sg-current-state*.  This number is the value of one of
the following symbols.  Only the states actually used by the current
system are documented here; some other codes are defined but not used.

.table 3 500
.item sys:sg-state-active
The stack group is the current one.

.item sys:sg-state-resumable
The stack group is waiting to be resumed, at which time it will pick up
its saved machine state and continue doing what it was doing before.

.item sys:sg-state-awaiting-return
The stack group called some other stack group as a function.  When it is
resumed, it will return from that function call.

.item sys:sg-state-awaiting-initial-call
The stack group has been preset (see below) but has never been called.
When it is resumed, it will call its initial function with the preset
arguments.

.item sys:sg-state-exhausted
The stack group's initial function has returned.  It cannot be resumed.

.item sys:sg-state-awaiting-error-recovery
When a stack group gets an error it goes into this state, which prevents
anything from happening to it until the error handler has looked at it.
In the meantime it cannot be resumed.

.item sys:sg-state-invoke-call-on-return
When the stack group is resumed, it will call a function.  The function
and arguments are already set up on the stack.  The debugger uses this
to force the stack group being debugged to do things.
.end_table

.section Stack Group Functions

.defun make-stack-group name &rest options
Creates and returns a new stack group.  2name* may be any symbol
or string; it is used in the stack group's printed representation.
2options* is a list of alternating keywords and values.  The options
are not too useful; most calls to 3make-stack-group* don't need any
options at all.  The options are:
.table 3
.kitem :sg-area
The area in which to create the stack group structure itself.
Defaults to the default area (the value of 3default-cons-area*).

.kitem :regular-pdl-area
The area in which to create the regular PDL.  Only certain areas
specially designated when they were created may be used for regular
PDLs, because regular PDLs are cached in a hardware device called the
2pdl buffer*.  The default is 3sys:pdl-area*.

.kitem :special-pdl-area
The area in which to create the special PDL.
Defaults to the default area (the value of 3default-cons-area*).

.kitem :regular-pdl-size
Length of the regular PDL to be created.  Defaults to 3000 octal.

.kitem :special-pdl-size
Length of the special PDL to be created.  Defaults to 2000 octal.

.kitem :swap-sv-on-call-out
.item1 :swap-sv-of-sg-that-calls-me
'kindex :swap-sv-of-sg-that-calls-me make-stack-group
These flags default to 1.  If these are 0, the system does not maintain
separate binding environments for each stack group.  You do not want
to use this feature.

.kitem :trap-enable
This determines what to do if a microcode error occurs.  If it is 1
the system tries to handle the error; if it is 0 the machine halts.
Defaults to 1.  It is 0 only in the error handler stack group, a
trap in which would not work anyway.

.kitem :safe
If this flag is 1 (the default), a strict call-return discipline among
stack-groups is enforced.  If 0, no restriction on stack-group
switching is imposed.
.c I could explain this a lot better if I understood it.
.end_table
.end_defun

.defcondition sys:pdl-overflow (3error*)
This condition is signaled when there is overflow on either the regular
pdl or the special pdl.  The 3:pdl-name* operation on the condition
instance returns either 3:special* or 3:regular*, to tell handlers
which one.

The 3:grow-pdl* proceed type is provided.  It takes no arguments.
Proceeding from the error automatically makes the affected pdl bigger.
.end_defcondition

.defvar eh:pdl-grow-ratio
This is the factor by which to increase the size of a pdl after an overflow.
It is initially 31.5*.
.end_defvar

.defun eh:require-pdl-room regpdl-space specpdl-space
Makes the current stack group larger if necessary, to make sure that
there are at least 2regpdl-space* free words in the regular pdl, and at
least 2specpdl-space* free words in the special pdl, not counting the words
currently in use.
.end_defun

.defun stack-group-preset stack-group function &rest arguments
This sets up 2stack-group* so that when it is resumed,
2function* will be applied to 2arguments* within the stack group.
Both stacks are made empty; all saved state in the stack group is destroyed.
3stack-group-preset* is typically used to initialize a stack group just after it is made,
but it may be done to any stack group at any time.  Doing this to a stack
group which is not exhausted destroys its present state without
properly cleaning up by running 3unwind-protect*s.
.end_defun

.defun stack-group-resume s x
Resumes 2s*, transmitting the value 2x*.
No stack group's resumer is affected.
.end_defun

.defun si:sg-resumable-p s
3t* if 2s*'s state permits it to be resumed.
.end_defun

.defcondition sys:wrong-stack-group-state (3error*)
This is signaled if, for example, you try to resume a stack group which
is in the exhausted state.
.end_defcondition

.defun stack-group-return x
Resumes the current stack group's resumer, transmitting the value 2x*.
No stack group's resumer is affected.
.end_defun

.defun symeval-in-stack-group symbol sg &optional frame as-if-current
Evaluates the variable 2symbol* as a special variable in the binding
environment of 2sg*.  If 2frame* is not 3nil*, it evaluates
2symbol* in the binding environment of execution in that frame.  (A
frame is an index in the stack group's regular pdl).

Two values are returned: the symbol's value, and a locative to where
the value is stored.  If 2as-if-current* is not 3nil*, the
locative points to where the value 2would* be stored if 2sg* were
running.  This may be different from where the value is stored now;
for example, the current binding in stack group 2sg* is stored in
2symbol*'s value cell when 2sg* is running, but is probably
stored in 2sg*'s special pdl when 2sg* is not running.
2as-if-current* makes no difference if 2sg* actually 2is*
the current stack group.

If 2symbol*'s current dynamic binding in the specified stack group and
frame is void, this signals a 3sys:unbound-variable* error.
.end_defun

.section Analyzing Stack Frames

A stack frame is represented by an index in the regular pdl array of the
stack group.  The word at this index is the function executing, or to be
called, in the frame.  The following words in the pdl contain the
arguments.

.defun sg-regular-pdl sg
Returns the regular pdl of 2sg*.  This is an array of type
3art-reg-pdl*.  Stack frames are represented as indices into this array.
.end_defun

.defun sg-regular-pdl-pointer sg
Returns the index in 2sg*'s regular pdl of the last word pushed.
.end_defun

.defun sg-special-pdl sg
Returns the special pdl of 2sg*.  This is an array of type
3art-special-pdl*, used to hold special bindings made by functions
executing in that stack group.
.end_defun

.defun sg-special-pdl-pointer sg
Returns the index in 2sg*'s special pdl of the last word pushed.
.end_defun

.need 1800
.nopara
The following functions are used to move from one stack frame to
another.

.defun eh:sg-innermost-active sg
Returns (the regular pdl index of) the innermost frame in 2sg*, the
one that would be executing if 2sg* were current.  If 2sg* is
current, the value is the frame of the caller of this function.
.end_defun

.defun eh:sg-next-active sg frame
Returns the next active frame out from
2frame* in 2sg*.  This is the one that called 2frame*.  If
2frame* is the outermost frame, the value is 2nil*.
.end_defun

.defun eh:sg-previous-active sg frame
Returns the previous active frame in from 2frame* in 2sg*.
This is the one called by 2frame*.  If 2frame* is the currently
executing frame, the value is 3nil*.  If 2frame* is 3nil*,
the value is the outermost or initial frame.
.end_defun

.defun eh:sg-innermost-open sg
Returns the innermost open frame in 2sg*, which may be the same as the
innermost active one or it may be within that.  In other respects, this is
like 3eh:sg-innermost-active*.
.end_defun

.defun eh:sg-next-open sg frame
Like 3eh:sg-next-active* but includes frames which are 2open*, that is,
still accumulating arguments prior to calling the function.
.end_defun

.defun eh:sg-previous-open sg frame
Like 3eh:sg-previous-active* but includes frames which are 2open*, that is,
still accumulating arguments prior to calling the function.
.end_defun

.defun eh:sg-frame-active-p sg frame
Returns 3t* if 2frame* is active; that is, if the function has been
entered.
.end_defun

.need 1800
Running interpreted code involves calls to 3eval*, 3cond*, etc.
which would not be there in compiled code.  The following three
functions can be used to skip over the stack frames of such functions,
showing only the frames for the functions the user would know about.

.defun eh:sg-next-interesting-active sg frame
Like 3eh:sg-next-active* but skips over uninteresting frames.
.end_defun

.defun eh:sg-previous-interesting-active sg frame
Like 3eh:sg-previous-active* but skips over uninteresting frames.
.end_defun

.defun eh:sg-out-to-interesting-active sg frame
If 2frame* is interesting, returns 2frame*.  Otherwise, it returns
the next interesting active frame.
.end_defun

.need 1800
.nopara
Functions to analyze the data in a particular stack frame:

.defun sys:rp-function-word regpdl frame
Returns the function executing in 2frame*.  2regpdl* should be
the 3sg-regular-pdl* of the stack group.
.end_defun

.defun eh:sg-frame-number-of-spread-args sg frame
Returns the number of arguments received by 2frame*, which should be
an active frame.  The rest argument (if any) and arguments
received by it, do not count.
.end_defun

.defun eh:sg-frame-arg-value sg frame n
Returns the value of argument number 2n* of stack frame 2frame* in
2sg*.  An error is signaled if 2n* is out of range, if the frame is
active.  (For an open frame, the number of arguments is not yet
known, so there is no error check.)

The second value is the location in which the argument is stored when
2sg* is running.  The location may not actually be in the stack, if
the argument is special.  The location may then contain other contents
when the stack group is not running.
.end_defun

.defun eh:sg-frame-rest-arg-value sg frame
Returns the value of the rest argument in 2frame*, or 3nil* if there
is none.

The second value is 3t* if the function called in 2frame* expects an
explicitly passed rest argument.

The third value is 3t* if the rest argument was passed explicitly.
If this is 3nil*, the rest arg is a stack list that overlaps the
arguments of stack frame 2frame*.  If it was passed explicitly, it may still
be a stack list, but not in this frame.  See (stack-list) for
more information on stack lists.
.end_defun

.defun eh:sg-frame-number-of-locals sg frame
Returns the number of local variables in stack frame 2frame*.
.end_defun

.defun eh:sg-frame-local-value sg frame n
Returns the value of local variable number 2n* of stack frame 2frame* in
2sg*.  An error is signaled if 2n* is out of range.

The second value is the location in which the local is stored when
2sg* is running.  The location may not actually be in the stack; if
not, it may have other contents when the stack group is not running.
.end_defun

.defun eh:sg-frame-value-value sg frame n &optional create-slot
Returns the value and location of the 2n*'th multiple value 2frame*
has returned.  If 2frame* has not begun to return values, the first
value returned is 3nil* but the location still validly shows where
value number 2n* will be stored.

If 2frame* was called with 3multiple-value-list*, it can return any
number of values, but they do not have cells to receive them until
2frame* returns them.  In this case, a non-3nil* 2create-slot*
means that this function should allocate cells as necessary so that a
valid location can be returned.  Otherwise, the location as well as the
value is 3nil*.
.end_defun

.defun eh:sg-frame-value-list sg frame &optional new-number-of-values
Returns three values that describe whether 2frame*'s caller wants
multiple values, and any values 2frame* has returned already.

The first value is a list in which live the values being, or to be,
returned by 2frame*.

The second value is 3nil* if this frame has not been invoked to return multiple values,
a number which is the number of values it has been asked for,
or a locative, meaning the frame was called with 3multiple-value-list*.
In the last case, the first value includes only the values 2frame*
has returned already, and the locative points to a cell that points
to the cons whose cdr should receive the next link of the list.

The third value is how many values 2frame* has returned so far.

If 2new-number-of-values* is non-3nil*, it is used to alter the
``number of values already returned'' as recorded in the stack group.
This may alter the length of the list that is the first value.
The value you get is the altered one, in that case.
.end_defun

.defun eh:sg-frame-special-pdl-range sg frame
Returns two values delimiting the range of 2sg*'s special pdl that
belongs to the specified stack frame.  The first value is the index of
the first special pdl word that belongs to the frame, and the second
value is the index of the next word that does not belong to it.

If the specified frame has no special bindings, both values are 3nil*.
Otherwise, the indicated special pdl words describe bindings made on
entry to or during execution in this frame.  The words come in pairs.

The first word of each pair contains the saved value; the second points
to the location that was bound.  When the stack group is not current,
the saved value is the value for the binding made in this frame.  When
the stack group is current, the saved value is the shadowed value, and
the value for this binding is either in the cell that was bound, or is
the saved value of another binding, at a higher index, of the same cell.

The bit 3sys:%%specpdl-closure-binding* is nonzero in the first word
of the pair if the binding was made before entry to the function itself.
This includes bindings made by closures, and by instances (including
3self*).  Otherwise, the binding was made by the function itself.
This includes arguments that are declared special.
.end_defun

.nopara
3symeval-in-stack-group* can be used to find the value of a special
variable at a certain stack frame ((symeval-in-stack-group-fun)).

.section Input/Output in Stack Groups
.setq sg-terminal-io-issues section-page

	Because each stack group has its own set of dynamic bindings, a
stack group does not inherit its creator's value of 3*terminal-io**
(see (terminal-io-var)), nor its caller's, unless you make special
provision for this.  The 3*terminal-io** a stack group gets by default
is a ``background'' stream that does not normally expect to be used.  If
it is used, it turns into a ``background window'' that will request
the user's attention.  Often this happens when an error invokes the
debugger.

	If you write a program that uses multiple stack groups, and you want
them all to do input and output to the terminal, you should pass the
value of 3*terminal-io** to the top-level function of each stack group
as part of the 3stack-group-preset*, and that function should bind
the variable 3*terminal-io**.

	Another technique is to use a closure as the top-level function
of a stack group.  This closure can bind 3*terminal-io** and any other
variables that should be shared between the stack group and its
creator.


.section An Example of Stack Groups

The canonical coroutine example is the so-called samefringe problem:
Given two trees, determine whether they contain the same
atoms in the same order, ignoring parenthesis structure.  A better
way of saying this is, given two binary trees built out of conses,
determine whether the sequence of atoms on the fringes of the trees
is the same, ignoring differences in the arrangement of the
internal skeletons of the two trees.  Following the usual rule
for trees, 3nil* in the cdr of a cons is to be ignored.

One way of solving this problem is to use 2generator* coroutines.
We make a generator for each tree.  Each time the generator is called
it returns the next element of the fringe of its tree.  After the
generator has examined the entire tree, it returns a special ``exhausted''
flag.  The generator is most naturally written as a recursive function.
The use of coroutines, i.e. stack groups, allows the two generators to
recurse separately on two different control stacks without having to
coordinate with each other.

The program is very simple.  Constructing it in the usual bottom-up style,
we first write a recursive function that takes a tree and 3stack-group-return*s
each element of its fringe.  The 3stack-group-return* is how the generator
coroutine delivers its output.  We could easily test this function by changing
3stack-group-return* to 3print* and trying it on some examples.

.lisp
(defun fringe (tree)
  (cond ((atom tree) (stack-group-return tree))
	(t (fringe (car tree))
	   (if (not (null (cdr tree)))
	       (fringe (cdr tree))))))
.end_lisp

Now we package this function inside another, which takes care of
returning the special ``exhausted'' flag.

.lisp
(defun fringe1 (tree exhausted)
  (fringe tree)
  exhausted)
.end_lisp

The 3samefringe* function takes the two trees as arguments and returns
3t* or 3nil*.  It creates two stack groups to act as the two
generator coroutines, presets them to run the 3fringe1* function, then
goes into a loop comparing the two fringes.  The value is 3nil* if a difference
is discovered, or 3t* if they are still the same when the end is reached.

.lisp
(defun samefringe (tree1 tree2)
  (let ((sg1 (make-stack-group "samefringe1"))
	(sg2 (make-stack-group "samefringe2"))
	(exhausted (ncons nil)))
    (stack-group-preset sg1 #'fringe1 tree1 exhausted)
    (stack-group-preset sg2 #'fringe1 tree2 exhausted)
    (do ((v1) (v2)) (nil)
      (setq v1 (funcall sg1 nil)
	    v2 (funcall sg2 nil))
      (cond ((neq v1 v2) (return nil))
	    ((eq v1 exhausted) (return t))))))
.end_lisp

Now we test it on a couple of examples:

.lisp
(samefringe '(a b c) '(a (b c))) => t
(samefringe '(a b c) '(a b c d)) => nil
.end_lisp

As stack groups are large, and slow to create, it is desirable to avoid
the overhead of creating one each time two fringes are compared.  It can
easily be eliminated with a modest amount of explicit storage
allocation, using the resource facility (see (defresource-fun)).  While
we're at it, we can avoid making the exhausted flag fresh each time; its
only important property is that it not be an atom.

.lisp
(defresource samefringe-coroutine ()
   :constructor (make-stack-group "for-samefringe"))

(defvar exhausted-flag (ncons nil))

(defun samefringe (tree1 tree2)
  (using-resource (sg1 samefringe-coroutine)
    (using-resource (sg2 samefringe-coroutine)
      (stack-group-preset sg1 #'fringe1 tree1 exhausted-flag)
      (stack-group-preset sg2 #'fringe1 tree2 exhausted-flag)
      (do ((v1) (v2)) (nil)
	(setq v1 (funcall sg1 nil)
	      v2 (funcall sg2 nil))
	(cond ((neq v1 v2) (return nil))
	      ((eq v1 exhausted-flag) (return t)))))))
.end_lisp

Now we can compare the fringes of two trees with no allocation of memory whatsoever.
