.c -*- Mode: Bolio -*-

.section The Patch Facility
.setq patch-facility section-page
.cindex patch
.cindex system maintenance

The patch facility allows a system maintainer to manage new releases of a
large system and issue patches to correct bugs.  It is designed to be
used to maintain both the Lisp Machine system itself and applications
systems that are large enough to be loaded up and saved on a disk
partition.

When a system of programs is very large, it needs to be maintained.
Often problems are found and need to be fixed, or other little changes
need to be made.  However, it takes a long time to load up all of the
files that make up such a system, and so rather than having every user
load up all the files every time he wants to use the system, usually the
files just get loaded once into a Lisp world, which is then saved away
on a disk partition.  Users then use this disk partition, copies of
which may appear on many machines.  The problem is that since the users
don't load up the system every time they want to use it, they don't get
all the latest changes.

The purpose of the patch system is to solve this problem.  A 2patch* file
is a little file that, when you load it, updates
the old version of the system into the new version of the system.  Most
often, patch files just contain new function definitions; old functions
are redefined to do their new thing.  When you want to use a system, you
first use the Lisp environment saved on the disk, and then you load all
the latest patches.  Patch files are very small, so loading them doesn't
take much time.  You can even load the saved environment, load up the
latest patches, and then save it away, to save future users the trouble
of even loading the patches.  (Of course, new patches may be made
later, and then these will have to be loaded if you want to get the
very latest version.)

For every system, there is a series of patches that have been made to
that system.  To get the latest version of the system, you load each
patch file in the series, in order.  Sooner or later, the maintainer of a
system wants to stop building more and more patches, and recompile
everything, starting afresh.  A complete recompilation is also necessary when
a system is changed in a far-reaching way, that can't be done with a
small patch; for example, if you completely reorganize a program, or
change a lot of names or conventions, you might need to completely
recompile it to make it work again.  After a complete recompilation has
been done, the old patch files are no longer suitable to use; loading
them in might even break things.

The way all this is kept track of is by labelling each version of a
system with a two-part number.  The two parts are called the 2major
version number* and the 2minor version number*.  The minor version
number is increased every time a new patch is made; the patch is
identified by the major and minor version number together.  The major
version number is increased when the program is completely recompiled,
and at that time the minor version number is reset to zero.  A complete
system version is identified by the major version number, followed by
a dot, followed by the minor version number.  Thus, patch 393.9*
is for major version 93 and minor version 9; it is followed by patch
393.10*.

To clarify this, here is a typical scenario.  A new system is created;
its initial version number is 31.0*.  Then a patch file is created;
the version of the program that results from loading the first patch
file into version 31.0* is called 31.1*.  Then another patch file
might be created, and loading that patch file into system 31.1*
creates version 31.2*.  Then the entire system is recompiled, creating
version 32.0* from scratch.  Now the two patch files are irrelevant,
because they fix old software; the changes that they reflect are
integrated into system 32.0*.

Note that the second patch file should only be loaded into system
31.1* in order to create system 31.2*; you shouldn't load it into
31.0* or any other system besides 31.1*.  It is important that all
the patch files be loaded in the proper order, for two reasons.  First,
it is very useful that any system numbered 31.1* be exactly the same
software as any other system numbered 31.1*, so that if somebody
reports a bug in version 31.1*, it is clear just which software is
being complained about.  Secondly, one patch might patch another patch;
loading them in some other order might have the wrong effect.

The patch facility keeps track of all the patch
files that exist, remembering which version each one creates.  There
is a separate numbered sequence of patch files for each major version
of each system.  All of them are stored in the file system, and the
patch facility keeps track of where they all are.  In addition to the
patch files themselves, there are 2patch directory* files that contain
the patch facility's data base by which it keeps track of what minor
versions exist for a major version, and what the last major version
of a system is.  These files and how to make them are described below.

In order to use the patch facility, you must define your system with
3defsystem* (see (system-system)) and declare it as patchable with the
3:patchable* option.  When you load your system (with 3make-system*,
see (make-system-fun)), it is added to the list of all systems present in
the world.  The patch facility keeps track of which version of each
patchable system is present and where the data about that system reside in
the file system.  This information can be used to update the Lisp world
automatically to the latest versions of all the systems it contains.  Once
a system is present, you can ask for the latest patches to be loaded, ask
which patches are already loaded, and add new patches.

You can also load in patches or whole new systems and then save the
entire Lisp environment away in a disk partition.  This is explained on
(disk-partition).

When a Lisp Machine is booted, it prints out a line of information
for each patchable system present in the booted Lisp world, saying
which major and minor versions are loaded.  This is done by
3print-herald* (see (print-herald-fun)).

.defun print-system-modifications &rest system-names
With no arguments, this lists all the systems present in this world and, for
each system, all the patches that have been loaded into this world.  For each patch
it shows the major version number (which is always the same since
a world can only contain one major version), the minor version number,
and an explanation of what the patch does, as typed in by the person who
made the patch.

If 3print-system-modifications* is called with arguments, only the
modifications to the systems named are listed.
.end_defun

.defun print-herald &optional format-dest
Prints the names and loaded version numbers of all patchable systems
loaded, and the microcode.  Also printed are the number of the band you
booted, the amount of physical and virtual memory you have, the host
name of the machine, and its associated machine name.  Example:
.lisp
MIT System, band 7 of CADR-1.
640K physical memory, 16127K virtual memory.
 System        98.43
 CADR          3.6
 ZMail         53.10
 MIT-Specific  22.0
 Microcode     309
MIT Lisp Machine One, with associated machine OZ.
.end_lisp
2format-dest* defaults to 3t*; if it is 3nil* the answer is
returned as a string rather than printed out.  2format-dest* can also
be a stream to print on.
.end_defun

.defun si:get-system-version &optional system
Returns two values, the major and minor version numbers of the version
of 2system* currently loaded into the machine, or 3nil* if that
system is not present.  2system* defaults to 3"System"*.
.end_defun

.defun si:system-version-info &optional (brief-p 3nil*)
Returns a string giving information about which systems and what
versions of the systems are loaded into the machine, and what microcode
version is running.  A typical string for it to produce is:
.lisp
"System 98.48, CADR 3.6, MIT-Specific 22.0, microcode 309"
.end_lisp
If 2brief-p* is 3t*, it uses short names, suppresses the microcode
version, any systems which should not appear in the disk label comment,
the name 3System*, and the commas:
.lisp
"98.48"
.end_lisp
.end_defun

.subsection Defining a System

In order to use the patch facility, you must declare your system as
patchable by giving the 3:patchable* option to 3defsystem* (see
(system-system)).  The major version of your system in the file system
is incremented whenever 3make-system* is used to compile it.
Thus a major version is associated with a set of QFASL files.
The major version of your system that is remembered as having been loaded into the
Lisp environment is set to the major version in the file system
whenever 3make-system* is used to load your system and the
major version in the file system is greater than what you had loaded before.

After loading your system, you can save it with the 3disk-save*
function (see (disk-save-fun)).  3disk-save* asks you for any
additional information you want printed as part of the greeting when the
machine is booted.  This is in addition to the names and versions of all
the systems present in this world.  If the system version does not fit
in the partition comment field allocated in the disk label, 3disk-save*
asks you to type in an abbreviated form.

.subsection Loading Patches

.defun load-patches &rest options
This function is used to bring the current world up to the latest minor
version of whichever major version it is, for all systems present, or
for certain specified systems.  If there are any patches
available, 3load-patches* offers to read them in. 
With no arguments, 3load-patches* updates all the systems present in
this world.  If you do not specify the systems to operate on, 3load-patches* also reloads
the site files if they have changed ((site-files)), and reloads the files defining
logical host translations if they have changed ((fs:make-logical-pathname-host-fun)).

2options* is a list of keywords.  Some keywords are followed by an argument.
The following options are accepted:
.table 3
.item :systems 2list*
'kindex :systems load-patches
2list* is a list of names of systems to be brought up to date.  If this
option is not specified, all patchable systems loaded are processed.

.kitem :unreleased
Loads unreleased patches with no special querying.  These patches
should be loaded for experimental use if you wish the benefit of the
latest bug fixes, but should not be loaded if you plan to save a band.

.kitem :site
Loads the latest site files if they have been changed since last loaded.
This is the default if you do not specify explicitly which systems to process.

.kitem :nosite
Prevents loading of site files.  This is the default when you specify the
systems to process.

.kitem :hosts
Reloads the files defining logical host translations if they have been
changed since last loaded.  This is the default if you do not specify
explicitly which systems to process.

.kitem :nohosts
Prevents loading of logical host translation files.  This is the default
when you specify the systems to process.

.kitem :verbose
Prints an explanation of what is being done.  This is the default.

.kitem :selective
For each patch, says what it is and then ask the user whether or not to
load it.  This is the default.  If the user answers 3P* (for
`Proceed'), selective mode is turned off for any remaining patches to
the current system.

.kitem :noselective
Turns off 3:selective*.

.kitem :silent
Turns off both 3:selective* and 3:verbose*.  In 3:silent* mode all necessary
patches are loaded without printing anything and without querying the user.

.kitem :force-unfinished
Loads patches that have not been finished yet, if they have been
compiled.
.end_table

3load-patches* returns 3t* if any patches were loaded.
.end_defun

When you load a patchable system with 3make-system*,
3load-patches* is called automatically on that system.

.defun si:patch-loaded-p major-version minor-version &optional (system-name 3"SYSTEM"*)
Returns 3t* if the changes in patch
2major-version*.2minor-version* of system 2system-name* are
loaded.  If 2major-version* is the major version of that system which
is currently loaded, then the changes in that patch are loaded if the
current minor version is greater than or equal to 2minor-version*.  If
the currently loaded major version is greater than 2major-version*
then it is assumed that the newer system version contains all the
improvements patched into earlier versions, so the value is 3t*.
.end_defun

.subsection Making Patches

There are two editor commands that are used to create patch files.
During a typical maintenance session on a system you will make several
edits to its source files.  The patch system can be used to copy these
edits into a patch file so that they can be automatically incorporated
into the system to create a new minor version.  Edits in a patch file
can be modified function definitions, new functions, modified
3defvar*'s and 3defconst*'s, or arbitrary forms to be evaluated, even including
3load*'s of new files.

The first step in making a patch is to 2start* it.  At this stage you
must specify which patchable system you are making a patch for.  Then you 2add*
one or more pieces of code from other source files to the patch.
Finally you 2finish* the patch.  This is when you fill in the description
of what the patch does; this description is what 3load-patches* prints
when it offers to load the patch.  If you have any doubts about whether
the patch will load and work properly, you finish it 2unreleased*;
then you can load it to test it but no bands can be saved containing the
patch until you explicitly release it later.

It is important that any change you patch should go in a patch for the
patchable system to which the changed source file belongs.  This makes
sure that nobody loads the change into a Lisp world which does not
contain the file you were changing--something that might cause trouble.
Also, it ensures that you never patch changes to the same piece of
code in two different patchable systems' patches.  This would lead to
disaster because there is no constraint on the order in which patches to
two different systems are loaded.

Starting a patch can be done with 3Meta-X Start Patch*.  It reads the
name of the system to patch with the minibuffer.  3Meta-X Add Patch*
can also start a patch, so an explicit 3Meta-X Start Patch* is needed
only infrequently.

3Meta-X Add Patch* adds the region (if there is one) or the current
``defun'' to the patch file currently being constructed.  If you change a
function, you should recompile it, test it, then once it works use 3Add
Patch* to put it in the patch file.  If no patch is being constructed,
one is started for you; you must type in the name of the system to patch.

A convenient way to add all your changes to a patch file is to use
3Meta-X Add Patch Changed Sections* or 3Meta-X Add Patch Buffer
Changed Sections*.  These commands ask you, for each changed function
(or each changed function in the current buffer), whether to add it to
the patch being constructed.  If you use these commands more than once,
a function which has been added to the patch and has not been changed
since is considered ``unchanged''.

The patch file being constructed is in an ordinary editor buffer.  If
you mistakenly 3Add Patch* something that doesn't work, you can select
the buffer containing the patch file and delete it.  Then later you can
3Add Patch* the corrected version.

While you are making your patch file, the minor version number that has
been allocated for you is reserved so that nobody else can use it.  This
way if two people are patching a system at the same time, they do not
both get the same minor version number.

After testing and patching all of your changes, use 3Meta-X Finish Patch* to
install the patch file so that other users can load it.  This compiles
the patch file if you have not done so yourself (patches are always compiled).
It also asks you for a comment describing the reason for the patch; 3load-patches*
and 3print-system-modifications* print these comments.  If the patch is
complex or it has a good chance of causing new problems, you should not use
3Meta-X Finish Patch*; instead, you should make an unreleased patch.

.cindex unreleased patches
A finished patch can be 2released* or 2unreleased*.  If a patch is
unreleased, it can be loaded in the usual manner if the user says `yes' to
a special query, but once it has been loaded the user will be strongly
discouraged from saving a band.  Therefore, you still have a chance to
edit the patch file and recompile it if there is something wrong with
it.  You can be sure that the old broken patch will not remain
permanently in saved bands.

To finish a patch without releasing it, use the command 3Meta-X Finish
Patch Unreleased*.  Then the patch can be tested by loading it.
After a sufficient period for testing, you can release the patch with
3Meta-X Release Patch*.  If you discover a bug in the patch after this
point, it is not sufficient to correct it in this patch file; you must
put the fix in a new patch to correct any bands already saved with the
broken version of this patch.

It is a good principle not to add any new features or fix any additional
bugs in a patch once that patch is released; change it only to correct
problems with that patch.  New fixes to other bugs should go in new
patches.

You can only be constructing one patch at any time.  3Meta-X Add Patch*
automatically adds to the patch you are constructing.  But you can start
constructing a different patch without finishing the first.  If you use
the command 3Meta-X Start Patch* while constructing a patch, you are
given the option of starting a new patch.  The old patch ceases to be
the one you are constructing but the patch file remains in its editor buffer.
Later, or in another session, you can go back to constructing the first
patch with the command 3Meta-X Resume Patch*.  This commands asks for
both a patchable system name and the patch version to resume constructing.
You can simply save the editor buffer of a patch file and resume
constructing that patch in a later session.  You can even resume constructing a finished
patch; though it rarely makes sense to do this unless the patch is
unreleased.

If you start to make a patch and change your mind, use the command
3Meta-X Cancel Patch*.  This deletes the record that says that
this patch is being worked on.  It also tells the editor that you
are no longer constructing any patch.  You can undo a finished (but unreleased)
patch by using 3Resume Patch* and then 3Cancel Patch*.  If a patch
is released, you cannot remove it from saved bands, so it is not
reasonable to cancel it at that stage.

.subsection Private Patches

A private patch is a file of changes which is not installed to be loaded
automatically in sequence by all users.  It is loaded only by explicit
request (using the function 3load*).  A private patch is not
associated with any particular patchable system, and has no version
number.

To make a private patch, use the editor command 3Meta-X Start Private
Patch*.  Instead of a patchable system name, you must specify a
filename to use for the patch file; since the patch is not to be
installed, there is no standard naming convention for it to follow.  Add
text to the patch using 3Meta-X Add Patch* and finish it using
3Meta-X Finish Patch*.  There is no concept of release for private
patches so there is no point in using 3Meta-X Finish Patch
Unreleased*.  There is also no data base recording all private patches,
so 3Meta-X Start Private Patch* will resume an existing patch, or even
a finished patch.  In fact, finishing a private patch is merely a way
to write a comment into it and compile it.

Once the private patch file is made, you can load it like any other file.

The private patch facility is just an easy way to copy code from various
files into one new file with 3Patch-File: T* in its attribute list (to
prevent warnings about redefining functions defined in other files) and
compile that file.

.subsection System Status
.setq patch-system-status section-page
.cindex status, of a patchable system

The patch system has the concept of the 2status* of a major version of a
system.  A status keyword is recorded in the Lisp world for each
patchable system that is loaded.  There is also a current status for
each major version of each system, recorded in the patch directory file
for that major version.  Loading patches updates the status in the Lisp
world to match the current status stored in the patch directory.  The
status in the patch directory is changed with 3si:set-system-status*.

The status is displayed when the system version is displayed, in places
such as the system greeting message (3print-herald*) and the disk
partition comment.

The status is one of the following keywords:
.table 3
.item :experimental
The system has been built but has not yet been fully debugged and released to users.
This is the default status when a new major version is created, unless it is
overridden with the 3:initial-status* option to 3defsystem*.

.item :released
The system is released for general use.  This status produces no extra text
in the system greeting and the disk partition comment.

.item :obsolete
The system is no longer supported.

.item :broken
This is like 3:experimental*, but is used when the system was thought incorrectly
to have been debugged, and hence was 3:released* for a while.

.item :inconsistent
Unreleased patches to this system have been loaded.
If any patchable system is in this status, 3disk-save* demands extra
confirmation, and the resulting saved band is identified as ``Bad'' in its
disk partition comment.
.end_table

.defun si:set-system-status system status &optional major-version
Changes the current status of a system, as recorded in the patch
directory file.  2system* is the name of the system.
2major-version* is the number of the major version to be changed; if
unsupplied it defaults to the version currently loaded into the Lisp
world.  2status* should be one of the keywords above.

Do not set the current system status to 3:inconsistent*.  A status of
3:inconsistent* is set up in the Lisp world when an unreleased patch
is loaded, and once set that way it never changes in that Lisp world.
The status recorded in the system's patch directory file should describe
the situation where all currently released patches are loaded.
It should never be 3:inconsistent*.
.end_defun

.subsection Patch Files

The patch system maintains several different types of files in
the directory associated with your system.  This directory is specified
to 3defsystem* via either the 3:patchable* option or the 3:pathname-default*
option.  These files are maintained automatically, but they are described here
so that you can know what they are and when they are obsolete and can be deleted. 

If the 3:patchable* option to 3defsystem* had no argument, then the
patch data files are stored on the host, device and directory specified as
the system's pathname default.  The names and types of the filenames
are all standard and do not include the name of the system in any way.

If the 3:patchable* option to 3defsystem* is given an argument, this
argument is a file namestring specifying the host, device and directory
to use for storing the patch data files.  In addition, the system's short name
is used in constructing the names of the files.  This allows you to store
the patch data files for several systems in the same directory.

There are three kinds of files that record patch information:
.table 1 0 200
.item 7**  the system patch directory

This file records the current major version number,
so that when the system is recompiled a new number can be allocated.

On Tops-20, this file has, by default, a name like 3OZ:PS:<MYDIR>PATCH.DIRECTORY*,
where the host, device, and directory (3OZ:PS:<MYDIR>*) come
from the system's 3:pathname-default* as explained above.

If 3:patchable* is given an argument, this file for system 3FOO* has
a name like 3OZ:PS:<PATDIR>FOO.PATCH-DIRECTORY*, where the host, device and directory
come from 3:patchable*'s argument.

.item 7**  the patch directory of a major version

There is a file of this kind for each major version of the system.
It records the patches that have been made for that major version:
the minor version, author, description and release status of each one.

The data in this file are in the form of a printed representation of a
Lisp list with two elements.  The first is the system status of this
major version (3:experimental*, 3:released*, 3:broken* or
3:obsolete*).  The second is another list with an element for each
patch.  The element for a patch is a list of length four: the minor
version, the patch description (a string) or 3nil* for an unfinished
patch, the author's name (a string), and a flag that is 3t* if the
patch is unreleased.

On a Tops-20, for major version 259, this file has, by default, a name like
3OZ:PS:<MYDIR>PATCH-259.DIRECTORY*.

If 3:patchable* is given an argument, this file for system 3FOO* has a name like
3OZ:PS:<PATDIR>FOO-259.PATCH-DIRECTORY*.

.item 7**  the individual patch

For each patch made, there is a Lisp source file and a QFASL file.

On a Tops-20, for version 259.12, these files have, by default, names like
3OZ:PS:<MYDIR>PATCH-259-12.LISP* and 3OZ:PS:<MYDIR>PATCH-259-12.QFASL*.

If 3:patchable* is given an argument, this file for system 3FOO* has a name like
3OZ:PS:<PATDIR>FOO-259-12.PATCH-DIRECTORY*.
.end_table

On certain types of file systems, slightly different naming conventions
are used to keep the names short enough to be legal.
